<center><h1>Philosophy</center></h1>

The ADAM Way predates ADAM. I've been using the methods described here for
over twenty years. Everything in this book stems from the underlying idea that
addiction is an illness that exists in nature as opposed to a set of choices
created by man. It is an underlying worldview quite contradictory to that in
DSM. As DSM is the dominant model of all psychiatric illness, some explanation
is in order.

The DSM model is supposed to be atheoretical, however, the criteria evidence an
underlying worldview of what addiction is. In DSM one diagnoses substance use
disorder based on behavioral criteria. If you have enough behavioral criteria,
you have a substance disorder; if you do not, you don't. These criteria are also
applicable to remission of the illness, so that, regardless of what substances
the patient is still using, if they don't exhibit the substance related behavior,
they don't meet criteria for active illness. That makes it possible to still
drink and yet be in full, sustained remission from Severe Alcohol Use Disorder,
something that no addiction specialist I know would say. Also, the DSM criteria
have been limited to substances; until DSM5’s inclusion of gambling disorder,
there could be no addiction without substances. This inclusion seems to be secondary
to a great deal of political pressure rather than an acceptance of addiction as
a primary illness.

So the worldview put forth by DSM is that people are well; they begin to behave
in a certain way with respect to a substance (or gambling), they then abuse that
substance, and then become dependent. When they stop, the dependence is in remission
and all continuing symptoms must be explained by some other diagnosis. This has
given rise to a huge "dual diagnosis" industry. The DSM model has also spawned
many medical interventions for addiction, most based on blocking the rewarding
effects of substances, which should, theoretically, stop drug-using behavior.

My experience was at odds with DSM. My patients told me that they were not normal
before they used their first substance. They told me that there were many
behaviors that they tried, which worked, before they tried drugs, and that they
only escalated when the first behavior or drug stopped working.  They told me that
"blocking" medications made them sometimes feel worse and increased their desire
to use something else that worked. They showed me that the brain calculated something
common in addiction that was not specific to any substance or behavior. They showed
me I needed to learn more.

Further study showed me that the work of Di Chiara et al in 1988 was the first step in
understanding addiction as a single illness regardless of drug or behavior used.
Of note, the DSM behavioral worldview still in use today was first published in 1981,
before any of this science was done. More study elucidated for me the neurobiology
behind this natural illness and highlighted the highly genetic nature of it. Over
time I came to see that people with addiction, largely, were not normal to begin with,
but rather had an illness that caused symptoms that the substance use relieved. So the
DSM worldview has it that people use drugs, which then cause symptoms, and continued
use causes damage. Whereas I was seeing a picture where people had an illness that
caused symptoms and the symptoms drove them to use substances. This view was outside
the mainstream until 2011 when ASAM[^8] published its new definition of addiction.
But long before ASAM joined the party, the ADAM way was using the worldview of
their definition.

So, the ADAM Way is based on the worldview that addiction exists in nature
largely independent of substances or compulsive behavior, that it is largely
genetic, and that a well-defined neurobiology explains all its core phenomena
and epiphenomena. Everything at Townsend is based on this worldview and the
biological model that explains it. All the tools we've developed and use daily
come from this understanding. That understanding was helpful but couldn't take
us far without the tools we've developed to take advantage of it. Accordingly,
the tools, while useful, are not functional without the understanding. Both
theory and practical tools must come together for success. An example of this
is medication for addiction.

The DSM model leads to using a single medication depending on which substance
the person is using, and this is the main thrust of all drug company research
and FDA approval in the area. So we get acamprosate for people with addiction
who use alcohol and buprenorphine for people with addiction who use opioids.
The ADAM method is to understand at a deep level the various points in the 
neurobiology, and not just to target each with a specific medication, but also
to do so in the correct order. Medical treatment for addiction will never work
with a cookie cutter approach; each patient's treatment must be tailored to that
patient, much like any other chronic illness.

Hopefully, this section has laid the groundwork for understanding why the
following sections are what they are. After one more section on the revolution
taking place in Addiction Medicine, I will explain the neurobiology as currently
understood, the medical interventions possible, and the tools available to use
those methods. I hope you'll find the Townsend Way valuable in your treatment of
addiction.


[8]: American Society of Addiction Medicine. Definition of Addiction.
www.asam.org/for -the-public/definition-of-addiction. April 2011.
